---
layout: mypost
title: Sarcasm to Local Believes in Early Missionary Periodicals in China
categories: [日思]
---



> CSS = *Cha Shisu Meiyue Tongjizhuan* 察世俗每月統記傳
> TXCY = *Texuan Cuoyao Meiyue Jizhuan* 特選撮要每月記傳



The two periodicals shared the same position against local idols with slightly different strategies of describing them. They both could not allow the existence of local gods. As discussed in the concept of “the real living god”, CSS firstly defined it and cited the Bible story to make examples of false gods in the West, with no examples related to Chinese local ones. TXCY continued and went further to add the supplement of Chinese examples. Medhurst was very hostile to the idols in China, with many articles arguing that. Same as CSS, TXCY contained a pair short stories, some of which were mentioned in former chapters. The number of such stories increased in TXCY. Nevertheless, different from those in CSS, they not only showed the power of God or the virtue of the Western people, but also indicated their discontent with the situation of Chinese tradition and believes.As a religious enemy, Buddhists were often cued in the articles. In TXCY, there was a story telling how a Buddhist monk “gets taught”. It was said that a new monk meditated and chanted all day, but no one in the temple invited him to eat. When he questioned others, he was ridiculed: “You meditate all day then you will be full, but we need to do some work to earn a life”. To understand the author’s implication better, it would be helpful to read the next story together. Right after the monk story was another one with the title “Listening to Music is Useless (聽樂無益)”. It was mainly to advise people not to indulge in listening to music, because music was very void though it could make people happy temporarily. It seems difficult to understand why they refused music when reading this story alone. Music did not function as a resistance in the mission; on the contrary, it played a religious role in the Eastern and Western transcultural encounter since late Ming Dynasty. Although it was Jesuit missionaries who brought Western instrument and songs to China firstly, music had its importance in both Catholicism and Protestantism. Besides, the length of this story was only a quarter of the previous one, without any specific background or more details. Therefore, we have the reason to believe that music herein was used as a metaphor, which could be used to explain the author’s judgement on Buddhism. In general, the Protestant missionaries’ view of Buddhism was extremely opposing. The monk who acted respectfully in Buddhist way all day was more pious than ordinary monks, but what he did was seen as impractical and illusory, which was actually to evaluate the effect of Buddhism as useless. Although the tone here was sort of ridiculing, which seemed relatively mild and not that sharp, it did not mean that Protestant missionaries had any tolerance for Buddhism. In narrative articles, a sharp attitude was not particularly necessary. However, in the argumentative ones, the missionary made a deep and profound criticism of Buddhism. I will discuss it later, using the example of Medhurst’s comments on Chinese festivals with Buddhist elements.



Before shifting on the topic of Chinese festival, here are more examples of local Chinese gods, from which we can see their thoughts on indigenous religions and some basic concepts in Confucianism more clearly. Mazu (Ma-tsu) was one of the idols whom the missionaries came across firstly. In Southeastern China, especially in coastal areas, villagers believed Goddess Mazu could bring safety for their sailing. It influenced much on the surrounding areas in Southeast Asia, where the early missionaries first arrived. Mazu was likely to be one of their strongest opponents there. Some scholars viewed this figure as a Chan Master.However, looking back on the history and the process of its “Verkultung”, the cult of Mazu was created and spread indigenously. Medhurst wrote a very long article (which was one of the longest in the periodicals) to put forward his critiques. This article had the following characteristics. First of all, it denied the false god by criticizing the legend of the its origin. The second was its unique form of question-answer, other than short articles, it was like a FAQ of products which is suitable to solve the readers’ doubts. And the third, the author tended to invoke the Confucian ideas to support his argument. With these three points forming a mode, Medhurst wrote a series of such articles to argue against Chinese tradition and religions. Mazu was said to have helped a boat from a heavy storm in her dream, and then got worshipped by the latter local generations. In the article, Medhurst believes Mazu’s tale was quite ordinary. His arguments were as follows: A dream was nothing rare, and the same was a storm. It was just a coincidence that the two things happened at the same time. Mazu was a “lewd woman (淫邪之女)” with an artificial title who could never save people and should never be believed in. To prove his words, the author quoted the sayings of Mencius and Confucius twice respectively. Under one part of the tale that Mazu was rewarded by the king, Mencius’ saying went, “The sovereign can present a man to Heaven, but he cannot make Heaven give that man the throne.” This sentence was from a dialogue between King Wu and Mencius. King Wu ever asked Mencius whether Emperor Yao had handed over the empire to Shun. Mencius said that it was heaven instead of Yao did that. In addition, Mencius answered “heaven does not speak in words, it only indicates through processes and events.” which reflected how sage did the communication with heaven about the mechanism underlying heaven and society. Medhurst quoted a sentence from Mencius’s dialogue here to show the irrationality of the emperor’s authorization to the Goddess Mazu. Medhurst did not misunderstand or misapply Mencius’s saying. It was a suitable quote when its aim was to refute the act of authorizing Mazu. But as explained in the former chapter, the concept “tian 天” in ancient China differed from God in Protestantism. The essence of this quote was to blur the boundary between two concepts intentionally. As a result, Medhurst at least acknowledged the existence of Confucian “tian” as well as some of its attributes. He agreed there was a dominator of nature, but it should be God. Thus, Confucianism seemed like a theory could be well used to explain their Protestantism. The next quote can help us understand Medhurst’s thought better. When evaluating the power of Mazu protecting sailors from accidents, he used Confucius saying, “He who offends against Heaven has none to whom he can pray. (獲罪於天, 無所禱也)” Confucius said that when asked whether to fawn *Ao* 奧 or *Zao* 竈, which were metaphors of two powerful dignitaries. Confucius meant that it was useless to fawn anyone when in trouble. In the original text, the focus of this sentence wa in the second half of the sentence. While in the quotation of Medhurst, the meaning of the first half also had important connotation. He wrote that “if God were angry… there would be no need praying again.” In other words, he emphasized the power of God. It was God that controlled disasters, which Confucius did not mean, or at least did not focus on this level. To use Rudolf Wagner’s term, the communication between heaven and the sages in the ancient classics was in a “subtle” relationship. The missionaries’ use of Confucian sayings with “Tian” was breaking this delicate relationship and placing them in a very clear position that fit the spirit of the Bible. From the critiques against Mazu, we can see the general attitude towards Confucian concept of “Tian”. 